---
tags: ["Xtext","revive"]
excerpt: Every now and then the question of how to highlight matching start and end tags comes up. Xtext's built in bracket matching is limited to one-character-tags. This post provides a small sample project with a possible solution.
---
Folding regions, bracket matching, outline etc. are ways to provide structural information about a model. Sometimes you might want to highlight matching tags that are longer than one character. In this case Xtext's built in bracket matching may not be enough for the user.
This post provides a simple [sample project]({{ site.url}}/assets/matchingTags.zip) indicating a solution for the Greeting Example. In the original version of the post, it was based on Xtext 1. Here the code is adapted to Xtext 2.10 — porting it to other versions should be straightforward. I shamelessly adapted code from Xtext2's mark occurrences code.

The idea is to define an annotation type and re-calculate annotations when the selection changes. All the interesting code is in the UI project. The `plugin.xml` defines the annotation type (whose properties may then be changed in the preference page). The `MyDslUIModule` configures a binding to an `IXtextEditorCallback`, so that the selection change listener can be registered when the editor is opened an unregistered when it is disposed. The actual work is done in the `GreetingsMatchingTagMarker`. Its code should by quite generic. If you want to adapt it to your purposes, you'll need a different Grammar access in `TaskMarkJob` and your own logic in its `fillAnnotationMap` method. There the annotations for a particular model element are calculated.