---
title: Migrating a 32-bit Eclipse RCP to 64-bit
tags: ["Eclipse"]
excerpt: |
  This post shows how I migrated a legacy 32-bit Eclipse RCP to 64-bit.
---
Recently, I was faced with the task of implementing some small enhancements for an Eclipse RCP application I implemented quite a few years ago.
There were a couple of challenges:

* It was a 32-bit Windows application (Galileo-based).
* I still had a development Eclipse with all necessary plugins...
  - also 32-bit
  - some plugins used originally are not to be found on current update sites anymore
* There is basically a single potential user — with a 64-bit machine like me.

For obvious reasons, I did not want to set up a completely new development environment from scratch.
I still have a 13 year old notebook running a 32-bit Windows which I could have used for running the original Eclipse, but it is so slow that programming would have been a real pain — also I wanted an updated 64-bit version of the RCP application. 
Upgrading the entire application to current versions was out of the question.

What was needed was getting the old application to run on 64-bit machine and getting the development Eclipse to run on a 64-bit machine with minimal effort.
With some playing around this was simpler than feared.
There were only a handful of architecture-specific plugin(fragment)s.

* org.eclipse.equinox.launcher.win32.win32.x86
* org.eclipse.swt.win32.win32.x86
* org.eclipse.core.filesystem.win32.x86
* org.eclipse.core.net.win32.x86
* org.eclipse.core.resources.win32.x86
* org.eclipse.equinox.security.win32.x86

It turned out that replacing the 32-bit executable with the 64-bit one, finding and adding the x86_64-variants of the above plugins to the plugins folder and updating the corresponding entries in the config.ini (configuration folder) or bundles.info (org.eclipse.equinox.simpleconfigurator in configuration) was sufficient.
With these minimal modifications, I had the old development environment running on my current 64-bit machine.

Building the 64-bit RCP was no problem after that.
Again replacing 32-bit dependencies by 64-bit ones was enough.

## a single 32- and 64-bit deliverable
Then I wondered, whether it was possible to have a single deliverable for both 32-bit and 64-bit Windows.
As I said, for my development environment I simply added the 64-bit jars to the plugins folder (without removing the 32-bit ones) without any negative effects.
Again, it was surprisingly simple.
The executable looks for a corresponding "launcher" ini (e.g. eclipse.exe looks for eclipse.ini, myrcp.exe looks for myrcp.ini and so on), so you can have an eclipse64bit.exe next to a eclipse32bit.exe with the corresponding ini files.

All you have to do now is point them to their corresponding configuration. By default there is a configuration folder next to the plugins folder. Instead of having only one, you create a config32 and a config64 folder (read: have a standard configuration built, copy it and adapt the architecture dependent entries) and add

```
-configuration
config32
```

to the eclipse32bit.ini (and an analogous pointer to the 64-bin-ini).
The -configration option points the launcher to, as you might guess, the configuration.
If you have made sure all the needed architecture-dependent plugin fragments are located in the plugins folder, you now can deliver a single RCP-zip which can be run in both a 32- and 64-bit environment.